docs/Design.md, before:

# Design of the solution

## Design of Advanced Higher concepts

## Design of integration

### Query design

#### Registration query

Insert: username, password  
Table: users  
Values: validated inputs from registration form

Insert: id, username
Table: sessions
Values: generated session token, validated input username

#### Login query

Select: Just check if the user exists (select 1)  
Table: users  
Where: username matches the validated input username and password matches the validated input password

#### Logout query

Delete: sessions  
Where: id matches the session token in the cookie

#### Authentication query

Select: Just check if the session exists (select 1)  
Table: sessions  
Where: id matches the session token in the cookie

#### Homepage query

Select: post id, post time, post content, user username  
Table: post  
Join: user on post username = user username  
Limit: 10

#### Create post query

Insert: post content, user username  
Table: post  
Join: session where user username = session username  
Values: input from post form, username matched from session token in the cookie

#### Profile query

Select: post id, post time, post content, user username  
Table: post  
Join: user where post username = user username  
Where: user username matches the username provided in the URL  
Limit: 10

#### Search query

Select: post id, post time, post content, user username
Table: post
Join: user where post username = user username

Result of all posts will be searched with binary search

### Database design

All fields are required and not null on all tables

#### User table

Username: varchar(255) (primary key)
Password: varchar(255)

#### Session table

Id: varchar(255) (primary key)
Username: varchar(255) (foreign key referencing user username)

#### Post table

Id: int (primary key, auto-increment)
Time: datetime (default to current time)
Content: text
Username: varchar(255) (foreign key referencing user username)

#### Entity-relationship diagram

```mermaid
erDiagram
USER {
	varchar(255) username
	varchar(255) password
}
SESSION {
	varchar(255) id
	varchar(255) username
}
POST {
	int id
	datetime time
	text content
	varchar(255) username
}
USER ||--o{ SESSION: ""
USER ||--o{ POST: ""
```

### Design of website hierarchy

![Website hierarchy](hierarchy.png)

### Server-side processes

#### Database connection

```
Proxy server:
	Connect to database using connection variables
	Start a server to listen for incoming requests
	When a request is received:
		Run the body as a query on the database
		If query or connection fails:
			Return an error message
		Return the result of the query

Website:
	Connect to proxy server
	If connection fails:
		Return an error message
	When the "query" function is called:
		Send the request to the proxy server
		If the request errors:
			Return an error message
		Return the rows of the result
```

#### User login

```
Get the submitted username and password
If either is empty:
	Return an error message
Query to find the user with the given username and password
If the user does not exist:
	Return an error message
Generate a new session token
Create a new session with the user's username and the session token
Return a redirect to the homepage with a "set-cookie" header containing the session token
```

#### User registration

```
Get the submitted username and password
If either is empty:
	Return an error message
Query to find the user with the given username
If the user already exists:
	Return an error message
Generate a new session token
Query to create a new user with the given username and password
Query to create a new session with the user's username and the session token
Return a redirect to the homepage with a "set-cookie" header containing the session token
```

#### User logout

```
Get the cookie from the request
Get the session token from the cookie
If the session token exists:
	Query to delete the session with the given session token
Return a redirect to the login page
```

#### Authentication

```
Get the cookie from the request
Get the session token from the cookie
If the session token exists:
	Query to find the session with the given session token
If the session exists and the user is trying to access the register or login page:
	Redirect the user to the homepage
Else if the session does not exist and the user is trying to access a page that requires authentication:
	Redirect the user to the login page
Else
	Display the requested page
```

## User-interface design

Wireframes go here

Commit message:

Formatting improvements and add wireframe designs to design document

docs/Design.md, after:

# Design of the solution

## Design of Advanced Higher concepts

## Design of integration

### Query design

#### Registration query

Insert: username, password  
Table: users  
Values: validated inputs from registration form

Insert: id, username
Table: sessions
Values: generated session token, validated input username

#### Login query

Select: Just check if the user exists (select 1)  
Table: users  
Where: username matches the validated input username and password matches the validated input password

#### Logout query

Delete: sessions  
Where: id matches the session token in the cookie

#### Authentication query

Select: Just check if the session exists (select 1)  
Table: sessions  
Where: id matches the session token in the cookie

#### Homepage query

Select: post id, post time, post content, user username  
Table: post  
Join: user on post username = user username  
Limit: 10

#### Create post query

Insert: post content, user username  
Table: post  
Join: session where user username = session username  
Values: input from post form, username matched from session token in the cookie

#### Profile query

Select: post id, post time, post content, user username  
Table: post  
Join: user where post username = user username  
Where: user username matches the username provided in the URL  
Limit: 10

#### Search query

Select: post id, post time, post content, user username
Table: post
Join: user where post username = user username

Result of all posts will be searched with binary search

### Database design

All fields are required and not null on all tables

#### User table

Username: varchar(255) (primary key)
Password: varchar(255)

#### Session table

Id: varchar(255) (primary key)
Username: varchar(255) (foreign key referencing user username)

#### Post table

Id: int (primary key, auto-increment)
Time: datetime (default to current time)
Content: text
Username: varchar(255) (foreign key referencing user username)

#### Entity-relationship diagram

```mermaid
erDiagram
USER {
	varchar(255) username
	varchar(255) password
}
SESSION {
	varchar(255) id
	varchar(255) username
}
POST {
	int id
	datetime time
	text content
	varchar(255) username
}
USER ||--o{ SESSION: ""
USER ||--o{ POST: ""
```

### Design of website hierarchy

![Website hierarchy](hierarchy.png)

Accessing the logout page will immediately delete the user's session and redirect them to the login page.

### Server-side processes

#### Database connection

```
Proxy server:
	Connect to database using connection variables
	Start a server to listen for incoming requests
	When a request is received:
		Run the body as a query on the database
		If query or connection fails:
			Return an error message
		Return the result of the query

Website:
	Connect to proxy server
	If connection fails:
		Return an error message
	When the "query" function is called:
		Send the request to the proxy server
		If the request errors:
			Return an error message
		Return the rows of the result
```

#### User login

```
Get the submitted username and password
If either is empty:
	Return an error message
Query to find the user with the given username and password
If the user does not exist:
	Return an error message
Generate a new session token
Create a new session with the user's username and the session token
Return a redirect to the homepage with a "set-cookie" header containing the session token
```

#### User registration

```
Get the submitted username and password
If either is empty:
	Return an error message
Query to find the user with the given username
If the user already exists:
	Return an error message
Generate a new session token
Query to create a new user with the given username and password
Query to create a new session with the user's username and the session token
Return a redirect to the homepage with a "set-cookie" header containing the session token
```

#### User logout

```
Get the cookie from the request
Get the session token from the cookie
If the session token exists:
	Query to delete the session with the given session token
Return a redirect to the login page
```

#### Authentication

```
Get the cookie from the request
Get the session token from the cookie
If the session token exists:
	Query to find the session with the given session token
If the session exists and the user is trying to access the register or login page:
	Redirect the user to the homepage
Else if the session does not exist and the user is trying to access a page that requires authentication:
	Redirect the user to the login page
Else
	Display the requested page
```

## User-interface design

### Homepage

![Homepage wireframe](Homepage.png)

### Profile

![Profile wireframe](Profile.png)

### Search

![Search wireframe](Search.png)

### Login

![Login wireframe](Login.png)

### Register

![Register wireframe](Register.png)
